PHP profiling public beta (#12871)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/profiler/enabling/php.md

---
title: Enabling the PHP Profiler
kind: Documentation
code_lang: php
type: multi-code-lang
code_lang_weight: 50
further_reading:
    - link: 'getting_started/profiler'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Getting Started with Profiler'
    - link: 'tracing/profiler/search_profiles'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Learn more about available profile types'
    - link: 'tracing/profiler/profiler_troubleshooting'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Fix problems you encounter while using the profiler'
---

{{< site-region region="us5" >}}
<div class="alert alert-warning">
  The Continuous Profiler is not available for the Datadog {{< region-param key="dd_site_name" >}} site.
</div>
{{< /site-region >}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">
The Datadog PHP Profiler is currently in public beta. Datadog recommends evaluating the profiler in a non-sensitive environment before deploying in production.
</div>

> Starting in tracer version 0.69.0, both the tracer and profiler can be installed simultaneously using the script `datadog-setup.php`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting in version 0.69.0, both the tracer and profiler can be installed simultaneously using the script `datadog-setup.php`.
```
Maybe? I think as far as our customers are concerned we should treat this as thought there's a single version for what's now both the tracer and profiler.

Author: If you do `php -v` there will be independent versions. IMO, we should keep it this way until we've merged.

## Requirements

The Datadog Profiler requires at least PHP 7.1. PHP 8.1 is not yet supported. ZTS builds of PHP are not supported, nor are debug builds.

A 64-bit, Linux Operating System (OS) is required.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "GNU C Linux" %}}

An Operating System with glibc 2.17 or newer is needed. The following OS versions or newer meet this requirement:
  - CentOS 7
  - Debian 8, which has reached End Of Life (EOL).
  - Ubuntu 14.04, which is EOL.

> Datadog recommends running a supported OS version.

Reviewer: What does this mean?

Author: Two of the minimum versions of OS's there are EOL. I'm not sure the best way to say it, but I was trying to indicate that Datadog recommends running a not-EOL OS version.

Author: I updated the wording:

> Datadog recommends running an OS version which is not EOL.

What do you think?

Reviewer: I'm like -0.1 on including a warning like this but not a big deal.

> The following libraries must be installed:

Reviewer: I don't think we list basic core libs that are needed in other languages. I think this might confuse more users that it helps. If we expect that these might be missing on occasional systems maybe we could have the installer check for them so the common case is "user never thinks about this" and only hears about this if they need to take action.

Reviewer: Looks like you updated this and it looks much better!

  - `libc.so.6`
  - `libpthread.so.0`
  - `libdl.so.2`
  - `libm.so.6`

The tracer also requires these libraries:
  - `libcurl.so.4`
  - `librt.so.1`

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Alpine Linux" %}}

Version 3.13 of Alpine Linux or newer is required. The following libraries must be installed:
  - `libc.musl-x86_64.so.1`

The tracer also requires these libraries:
  - `libcurl.so.4`
  - `libexecinfo.so.1`

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Installation

To begin profiling applications:

 1. If you are already using Datadog, upgrade your Agent to version [7.20.2][2]+ or [6.20.2][3]+.

>  2. Download the `datadog-setup.php` script from the [GitHub release page](https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-php/releases). Version 0.69.0 was the first release to include this installer. Verify its sha256sum with the values provided on the release page.

Reviewer: We don't say to verify the checksum for other languages. We should be consistent one way or the other.

IMO we should not include this. The checksums are there for users who want to check them. For the others, we really want to keep things as dead simple as we can.

>  3. Run the installer to install both the tracer and profiler, for example `php datadog-setup.php  --enable-profiling`. This script is interactive and asks which of the detected PHP locations it should install to. At the end of the script, it outputs the non-interactive version of the command arguments for future use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 3. Run the installer to install both the tracer and profiler, for example `php datadog-setup.php --enable-profiling`. This script is interactive and asks which of the detected PHP locations it should install to. At the end of the script, it outputs the non-interactive version of the command arguments for future use.
```

Author: Just clarifying: there was an extra space in there?

>  4. Configure the profiler with environment variables. The tracer supports using INI values, but the profiler does not support INI settings yet.

Reviewer: Like the other languages, we should stick with the bare minimum recommended config (env, service, version) and leave the rest for the full table of config at the bottom.

Is there anything useful we can say about where/how to configure the environment vars for typical php setups?

Author: > Like the other languages, we should stick with the bare minimum recommended config (env, service, version) and leave the rest for the full table of config at the bottom.

Plus `DD_PROFILING_ENABLED`, as it defaults to being off so that when we eventually merge or install by default that it doesn't suddenly come on.

> Is there anything useful we can say about where/how to configure the environment vars for typical php setups?

I'll look around, as it can be a gotcha in php-fpm.

Author: This is what the tracer says: https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/setup_overview/setup/php/?tab=containers#configuration. Maybe we should link to that to keep it brief on this page?

Author: For now I've linked to this page and added the 3 `DD_PROFILING_*` env vars to it; let me know what you think.

Reviewer: From an offline convo: several of the profilers are listing more config options below on the profiling page, and I tentatively think php should follow that pattern, but not a blocker.

Reviewer: Oh and the 3 config tabs looks great!

</div>
{{< /site-region >}}

<div class="alert alert-warning">
The Datadog PHP Profiler is currently in public beta. Datadog recommends evaluating the profiler in a non-sensitive environment before deploying in production.
</div>

Starting in tracer version 0.69.0, both the tracer and profiler can be installed simultaneously using the script `datadog-setup.php`.

## Requirements

The Datadog Profiler requires at least PHP 7.1. PHP 8.1 is not yet supported. ZTS builds of PHP are not supported, nor are debug builds.

A 64-bit, Linux Operating System (OS) is required.

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "GNU C Linux" %}}

An Operating System with glibc 2.17 or newer is needed. The following OS versions or newer meet this requirement:
  - CentOS 7.
  - Debian 8, which has reached End Of Life (EOL).
  - Ubuntu 14.04, which is EOL.

Datadog recommends running an OS version which is not EOL.

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Alpine Linux" %}}

Version 3.13 of Alpine Linux or newer is required as the profiler is built against musl v1.2.

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

## Installation

To begin profiling applications:

 1. If you are already using Datadog, upgrade your Agent to version [7.20.2][2]+ or [6.20.2][3]+.

>  2. Download the `datadog-setup.php` script from the [GitHub release page](https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-php/releases). Version 0.69.0 was the first release to include this installer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 2. Download the `datadog-setup.php` script from the [GitHub release page][7]. Version 0.69.0 is the first tracer release to include this installer.
```

 3. Run the installer to install both the tracer and profiler, for example `php datadog-setup.php --enable-profiling`. This script is interactive and asks which of the detected PHP locations it should install to. At the end of the script, it outputs the non-interactive version of the command arguments for future use.

>  4. Configure the profiler with environment variables. The tracer supports using INI values, but the profiler does not support INI settings yet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 4. Configure the profiler with environment variables. Unlike the tracer the profiler does not support INI settings.
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "CLI" %}}

Set the environment variables before calling PHP, for example:

```
export DD_PROFILING_ENABLED=true
export DD_SERVICE=app-name
export DD_ENV=prod
export DD_VERSION=1.3.2

php hello.php
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "PHP-FPM" %}}

Use the `env` directive in the php-fpm’s `www.conf` file, for example:

```
env[DD_PROFILING_ENABLED] = true
env[DD_SERVICE] = app-name
env[DD_ENV] = prod
env[DD_VERSION] = 1.3.2
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Apache" %}}

Use `SetEnv` from the server config, virtual host, directory, or `.htaccess` file:

```
SetEnv DD_PROFILING_ENABLED true
SetEnv DD_SERVICE app-name
SetEnv DD_ENV prod
SetEnv DD_VERSION 1.3.2
```

{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

See the [configuration docs][4] for more environment variables.

>  5. A minute or two after receiving a request, profiles will show up on the [APM > Profiler page][5].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 5. A minute or two after receiving a request, profiles appear on the [APM > Profiler page][5].
```

## Not sure what to do next?

The [Getting Started with Profiler][6] guide takes a sample service with a performance problem and shows you how to use Continuous Profiler to understand and fix the problem.

## Further Reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}

[1]: /tracing/setup_overview/
[2]: https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings#agent/overview
[3]: https://app.datadoghq.com/account/settings?agent_version=6#agent
[4]: /tracing/setup_overview/setup/php/#environment-variable-configuration
[5]: https://app.datadoghq.com/profiling

> [6]: /getting_started/profiler/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[6]: /getting_started/profiler/
[7]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-php/releases
```

{{< /tabs >}}

## Installation

To begin profiling applications:

 1. If you are already using Datadog, upgrade your Agent to version [7.20.2][2]+ or [6.20.2][3]+.

 2. Download the `datadog-setup.php` script from the [GitHub release page](https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-php/releases). Version 0.69.0 was the first release to include this installer.

 3. Run the installer to install both the tracer and profiler, for example `php datadog-setup.php --enable-profiling`. This script is interactive and asks which of the detected PHP locations it should install to. At the end of the script, it outputs the non-interactive version of the command arguments for future use.

 4. Configure the profiler with environment variables. The tracer supports using INI values, but the profiler does not support INI settings yet.

| Environment Variable | Acceptable Values       | Comment |
|----------------------|-------------------------|---------|
| `DD_PROFILING_ENABLED` | Boolean values\*          | Defaults to `off` |
| `DD_PROFILING_LOG_LEVEL` | `off`, `error`, `warn`, `info`, `debug` | Defaults to `off` |
| `DD_PROFILING_EXPERIMENTAL_CPU_TIME_ENABLED` | Boolean values\* | Defaults to `off` |

> \* Acceptable truthy boolean values are `1`, `on`, `yes`, and `true`. Acceptable falsey boolean values are `0`, `no`, `off`, and `false`.

Author: The trace docs don't specify what values are considered truthy, so I'm not sure if they match. Any recommendations?
